.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008-2010 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" Copyright (c) 2012-2013 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\" Copyright (c) 2013-2014 Google, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(BSD_2_CLAUSE)
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH CAP_RIGHTS_GET 2 2014-05-07 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
cap_rights_get \- retrieve Capsicum capability rights
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/capsicum.h>
.sp
.BI "int cap_rights_get(int " fd ", struct cap_rights *" rights ,
.BI "                   unsigned int *" fcntls ,
.BI "                   int *" nioctls ", unsigned int *" ioctls );
.SH DESCRIPTION
Obtain the current Capsicum capability rights for a file descriptor.
.PP
The function will fill the
.I rights
argument (if non-NULL) with the primary capability rights of the
.I fd
descriptor.  The result can be examined with the
.BR cap_rights_is_set (3)
family of functions.  The complete list of primary rights can be found in the
.BR rights (7)
manual page.
.PP
If the
.I fcntls
argument is non-NULL, it will be filled in with a bitmask of allowed
.BR fcntl (2)
commands; see
.BR cap_rights_limit (2)
for values.  If the file descriptor does not have the
.B CAP_FCNTL
primary right, the returned
.I fcntls
value will be zero.
.PP
If the
.I nioctls
argument is non-NULL, it will be filled in with the number of allowed
.BR ioctl (2)
commands, or with the value CAP_IOCTLS_ALL to indicate that all
.BR ioctl (2)
commands are allowed.  If the file descriptor does not have the
.B CAP_IOCTL
primary right, the returned
.I nioctls
value will be zero.
.PP
If the
.I ioctls
argument is non-NULL, the caller should specify the size of the
provided buffer as the initial value of the
.I nioctls
argument (as a count of the number of
.BR ioctl (2)
command values the buffer can hold).
On successful completion of the system call, the
.I ioctls
buffer is filled with the
.BR ioctl (2)
command values, up to maximum of the initial value of
.BR nioctls .
.PP
If all
.BR ioctl (2)
commands are allowed (the
.B CAP_IOCTL
primary capability right is assigned to the file descriptor and the
set of allowed
.BR ioctl (2)
commands was never limited for this file descriptor), the
system call will not modify the buffer pointed to by the
.I ioctls
argument.
.PP
Capsicum capability rights assigned to a file descriptor can be reduced with the
.BR cap_rights_limit (2)
system call.
.SH RETURN VALUE
.BR cap_rights_get ()
returns zero on success. On error, -1 is returned and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
isn't a valid open file descriptor.
.TP
.B EFAULT
Invalid pointer argument.
.SH VERSION
Capsicum support was added to the kernel in version 3.???.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cap_enter (2),
.BR cap_rights_limit (2),
.BR cap_rights_init (3),
.BR capsicum (7),
.BR rights (7)

