.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008-2010 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" Copyright (c) 2012-2013 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\" Copyright (c) 2013-2014 Google, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(BSD_2_CLAUSE)
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH CAP_RIGHTS_LIMIT 2 2014-05-07 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
cap_rights_limit \- limit Capsicum capability rights
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/capsicum.h>
.sp
.BI "int cap_rights_limit(int " fd ", const struct cap_rights *" rights ,
.BI "                     unsigned int " fcntls ,
.BI "                     int " nioctls ", unsigned int *" ioctls );
.SH DESCRIPTION
When a file descriptor is created by a function such as
.BR accept (2),
.BR accept4 (2),
.BR creat (2),
.BR epoll_create (2),
.BR eventfd (2),
.BR mq_open (2),
.BR open (2),
.BR openat (2),
.BR pdfork (2),
.BR pipe (2),
.BR pipe2 (2),
.BR signalfd (2),
.BR socket (2),
.BR socketpair (2)
or
.BR timerfd_create (2),
it implicitly has all Capsicum capability rights.
Those rights can be reduced (but never expanded) by using the
.BR cap_rights_limit ()
system call.
Once Capsicum capability rights are reduced, operations on the file descriptor
.I fd
will be limited to those permitted by the remainder of the arguments.
.PP
The
.I rights
argument describes the primary rights for the file descriptor, as a
.I cap_rights
structure:
.in +4n
.nf

#define CAP_RIGHTS_VERSION_00	0
#define CAP_RIGHTS_VERSION_01	1
#define CAP_RIGHTS_VERSION_02	2
#define CAP_RIGHTS_VERSION_03	3
#define CAP_RIGHTS_VERSION	CAP_RIGHTS_VERSION_00
struct cap_rights {
    __u64    cr_rights[CAP_RIGHTS_VERSION + 2];
};
.fi
.in
.PP
The contents of the
.I cr_rights
array are encoded as follows.
.IP \(bu
The top 2 bits of
.I cr_rights[0]
hold the array size minus 2, allowing for an array size between 2 and 5 inclusive.
.IP \(bu
The top 2 bits of the other
.I cr_rights
entries are zero.
.IP \(bu
The following 5 bits of each array entry indicate its position in the array,
from 0b00001 for entry [0], 0b00010 for entry [1], up to 0b10000 for entry [4].
.IP \(bu
The remaining 57 bits of each array entry identify a particular primary
right.
.PP
This encoding allows for future expansion in the number of distinct rights;
for example, a
.I cap_rights
structure holding the
.B CAP_READ
and
.B CAP_BINDAT
rights would have contents of
.in +4n
.nf
0x0200000000000001 0x0400000000001000
.fi
.in
as a version 0 array, but would be encoded in a larger version 1 array as
.in +4n
.nf
0x4200000000000001 0x0400000000001000 0x0800000000000000.
.fi
.in
.PP
User programs should prepare the contents of the
.I cap_rights
structure with the
.BR cap_rights_init (3)
family of functions.
The complete list of primary rights can be found in the
.BR rights (7)
manual page.
.PP
If a file descriptor is granted the
.B CAP_FCNTL
primary capability right, some specific
.BR fcntl (2)
commands can be selectively disallowed with the
.I fcntls
argument.  The following flags may be specified in the
.I fcntls
argument for this:
.TP
.B CAP_FCNTL_GETFL
Permit
.B F_GETFL
command.
.TP
.B CAP_FCNTL_SETFL
Permit
.B F_SETFL
command.
.TP
.B CAP_FCNTL_GETOWN
Permit
.B F_GETOWN
command.
.TP
.B CAP_FCNTL_SETOWN
Permit
.B F_SETOWN
command.
.PP
A value of
.B CAP_FCNTL_ALL
for the
.I fcntls
argument leaves the set of allowed
.BR fcntl (2)
commands unchanged.
.PP
However, note that
.BR fcntl (2)
commands that are analogous to other system calls
(such as
.B F_DUPFD
or
.BR F_GETPIPE_SZ )
are not controlled by the
.B CAP_FCNTL
right and so do not have corresponding values in the
.I fcntls
argument.
.PP
If a file descriptor is granted the
.B CAP_IOCTL
capability right, the list of allowed
.BR ioctl (2)
commands can be selectively reduced (but never expanded) using the
.I nioctls
and
.I ioctls
arguments.
The
.I ioctls
argument is an array of
.BR ioctl (2)
command values and the
.I nioctls
argument specifies the number of elements in the array.
.PP
If the
.I nioctls
argument is -1 or 0, the
.I ioctls
argument is ignored, and either all
.BR ioctl (2)
operations or no
.BR ioctl (2)
operations (respectively) will be allowed.
.PP
Capsicum capability rights assigned to a file descriptor can be obtained with the
.BR cap_rights_get (2)
system call.
.SH RETURN VALUE
.BR cap_rights_limit ()
returns zero on success. On error, -1 is returned and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
isn't a valid open file descriptor.
.TP
.B EINVAL
An invalid set of rights has been requested in
.IR rights .
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Out of memory.
.TP
.B ENOTCAPABLE
The arguments contain capability rights not present for the given file descriptor (Capsicum
capability rights list can only be reduced, never expanded).
.SH VERSION
Capsicum support was added to the kernel in version 3.???.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cap_enter (2),
.BR cap_rights_get (2),
.BR cap_rights_init (3),
.BR capsicum (7),
.BR rights (7)
