.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Google, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2009-2010, 2012-2013 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed at the University of Cambridge Computer
.\" Laboratory with support from a grant from Google, Inc.
.\"
.\" This software was developed by SRI International and the University of
.\" Cambridge Computer Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract (FA8750-10-C-0237)
.\" ("CTSRD"), as part of the DARPA CRASH research programme.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(BSD_2_CLAUSE)
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH PDFORK 2 2014-05-07 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
pdfork, pdgetpid, pdkill, pdwait4 \- system calls to manage process descriptors
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/capsicum.h>
.sp
.BI "int pdfork(int *" fdp ", int " flags ")"
.BI "int pdgetpid(int " fd ", pid_t *" pidp ")"
.BI "int pdkill(int " fd ", int " signum ")"
.BI "int pdwait4(int " fd ", int *" status ", int " options ", struct rusage *" rusage ")"
.SH DESCRIPTION
Process descriptors are special file descriptors that represent processes,
and are created using
.B pdfork (),
a variant of
.BR fork (2)
which, if successful, returns a process descriptor in the integer pointed to
by
.IR fdp .
Processes created via
.BR pdfork()
will not cause
.B SIGCHLD
on termination.
.B pdfork ()
can accept values for
.I flags
of:
.TP
.B PD_DAEMON
Instead of the default terminate-on-close behaviour, allow the process to
live until it terminates or is explicitly killed with
.BR pdkill (2)
or
.BR kill (2).
.PP
.BR pdgetpid ()
queries the process ID (PID) in the process descriptor
.IR fd .
.PP
.BR pdkill ()
is functionally identical to
.BR kill (2),
except that it accepts a process descriptor,
.IR fd ,
rather than a PID.
.PP
.BR pdwait4 ()
behaves identically to
.BR wait4 (2),
but operates with respect to a process descriptor argument rather than a PID.
.PP
The following system calls also have effects specific to process descriptors:
.TP
.BR fstat (2)
queries status of a process descriptor; currently only the
.IR st_mode ,
.IR st_birthtime ,
.IR st_atime ,
.IR st_ctime
and
.IR st_mtime
fields are defined.
If the owner read, write, and execute bits are set then the
process represented by the process descriptor is still alive.
.PP
.BR poll (2)
and
.BR select (2)
allow waiting for process state transitions; currently only
.B POLLHUP
is defined, and will be raised when the process dies.
.PP
.BR close (2)
will close the process descriptor; if the process is still alive and this is
the last reference to the process descriptor, the process will be terminated
with the signal
.B SIGKILL 
unless
.B PD_DAEMON
is set.
.SH RETURN VALUES
.BR pdfork ()
returns a PID, 0 or -1, as
.BR fork (2)
does.
.PP
.BR pdgetpid ()
and
.BR pdkill ()
return 0 on success and -1 on failure.
.PP
.BR pdwait4 ()
returns a PID on success and -1 on failure.
.SH ERRORS
These functions may return the same error numbers as their PID-based equivalents
(e.g.
.BR pdfork ()
may return the same error numbers as
.BR fork (2)),
with the following additions:
.TP
.B ENOTCAPABLE
The process descriptor being operated on has insufficient rights (e.g. lacks
.B CAP_PDKILL
for
.BR pdkill ) .
.SH VERSION
Process descriptor support was added to the kernel in version 3.???.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR close (2),
.BR fork (2),
.BR fstat (2),
.BR kill (2),
.BR poll (2),
.BR wait4 (2),
.BR capsicum (7),
.BR procdesc (7)
