.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Google, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2011, 2013 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Jonathan Anderson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(BSD_2_CLAUSE)
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH CAPSICUM 7 2014-05-07 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
capsicum \- lightweight OS capability and sandbox framework
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/capsicum.h>
.SH DESCRIPTION
Capsicum is a lightweight OS capability and sandbox framework implementing a hybrid
capability system model.
Capsicum can be used for application and library compartmentalisation, the
decomposition of larger bodies of software into isolated (sandboxed)
components in order to implement security policies and limit the impact of
software vulnerabilities.
.PP
Capsicum provides three core kernel mechanisms,
.IR "Capsicum capabilities",
.I "capability mode"
and
.IR "process descriptors",
each described below.

.SS Capsicum Capabilities
A
.I Capsicum capability
is a file descriptor that has been limited so that only
certain operations can be performed on it.
For example, a file descriptor returned by
.BR open (2)
may be refined using
.BR cap_rights_limit (2)
so that only
.BR read (2)
and
.BR write (2)
can be called on it, but not
.BR fchmod (2).
The complete list of the capability rights can be found in the
.BR rights (7)
manual page.

.SS Capability Mode
Capsicum capability mode is a process mode, entered by invoking
.BR cap_enter (3),
in which access to global OS namespaces (such as the file system and PID
namespaces) is restricted; only explicitly delegated rights, referenced by
memory mappings or file descriptors, may be used.
Once set, the flag is inherited by future children processes, and may not be
cleared.

.SS Process Descriptors
.I Process descriptors
are file descriptors representing processes, allowing parent processes to manage
child processes without requiring access to the PID namespace, and are described in
greater detail in
.BR procdesc (7).
.SH VERSIONS
Capsicum support is available in the kernel since version 3.???.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cap_enter (3),
.BR cap_getmode (3) ,
.BR cap_rights_get (2),
.BR cap_rights_limit (2) ,
.BR pdfork (2),
.BR pdgetpid (2),
.BR pdkill (2),
.BR pdwait4 (2),
.BR procdesc (7),
.BR rights (7)

